.TH sane-avision 5 "04 Mar 2003" "@PACKAGEVERSION@" "SANE Scanner Access Now Easy"
.IX sane-avision

.SH NAME
sane-avision \- SANE backend for original Avision and Avision OEM scanners
(HP, Minolta, Mitsubishi, UMAX and possibly more) flatbed scanners

.SH ABOUT THIS FILE

This file only is a short descripton of the avision-backend for sane!

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sane-avision
library implements a SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy) backend that
provides access to various Avision scanners and the Avision OEM
scanners labelled by HP, Minolta, Mitsubishi or Fujitsu.

.SH CONFIGURATION

The configuration file for this backend resides in 
	@CONFIGDIR@/avision.conf. 

Its contents is a list of device names that correspond to Avision and Avision
compatible scanners and backend-options. Empty lines and lines starting with
a hash mark (#) are ignored. A sample configuration file is shown below: 

.B I suggest you hold one hand on the power-button of the scanner while you try
the first scans!

 # this is a comment
  
 option force-a4
 option disable-gamma-table
 option disable-calibration
 option one-calib-only
 option old-calibration
 
 #scsi Vendor Model Type Bus Channel ID LUN 
 scsi AVISION
 scsi HP
 scsi /dev/scanner
 usb 0x03f0 0x0701
 
 - force-a4:
   Forces the backend to overwrite the scanable area
   returned by the scanner. This might be needed for
   the AV 630 which returns no area - or newer scanners
   which retun the area in a unkown format our backend
   doesn't recongize yet.
 
 - disable-gamma-table:
   Disables the usage of the scanner's gamma-table. You
   might try this if your scans hang or only produces
   random garbage.
 
 - disable-calibration:
   Disables the scanner's color calibration. You
   might try this if your scans hang or only produces
   random garbage.
 
 - one-calib-only:
   When this option is enabled, the backend will only
   perform a calibration when the backend is initialized
   and not before each scan. This might extend the life
   of the CCD, but does not work reliable with the newer
   USB scanners (they hang sometimes or return garbage
   image data). So this option should be used with care.
 
 - old-calibration:
   This enables the use of the old calibration code for
   testing purposes.
 
 Note: Any option above modifies the default code-flow
       for your scanner. The options should only be used
       when you encounter problems with the default be-
       haviour of the backend. Please report the need of
       options to the backend-author so the backend can
       be fixed as soon as possible.

.SH "DEVICE NAMES"
This backend expects device names of the form:
.PP
.RS
.I scsi special
.I usb special
.RE
.PP
Where
.I special
is the path-name for the device that corresponds to a SCSI scanner or
the USB vendor/product ID pair corresponding to the USB scanner. The
special device name must be a generic SCSI device or a
symlink to such a device.  The program 
.IR sane-find-scanner 
helps to find out the correct device. Under Linux, such a device name
could be
.I /dev/sg0
or
.IR /dev/sga ,
for example.  See sane-scsi(5) for details.

 Note: Since the backend now includes native USB access,
       it is no longer needed - even considered obsolete -
       to access the scanner via the SCSI emulation (named
       hpusbscsi on Linux) for Avision USB devices such as
       the HP 53xx, HP 74xx or Minolta film-scanners.

 A list with supported devices is built into the avision backend so
 normally specifying an ID should not be necessary.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I @CONFIGDIR@/avision.conf
The backend configuration file (see also description of
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
below).
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-avision.a
The static library implementing this backend.
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-avision.so
The shared library implementing this backend (present on systems that
support dynamic loading).

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
This environment variable specifies the list of directories that may
contain the configuration file.  Under UNIX, the directories are
separated by a colon (`:'), under OS/2, they are separated by a
semi-colon (`;').  If this variable is not set, the configuration file
is searched in two default directories: first, the current working
directory (".") and then in @CONFIGDIR@.  If the value of the
environment variable ends with the directory separator character, then
the default directories are searched after the explicitly specified
directories.  For example, setting
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
to "/tmp/config:" would result in directories "tmp/config", ".", and
"@CONFIGDIR@" being searched (in this order).
.TP
.B SANE_DEBUG_AVISION
If the library was compiled with debug support enabled, this
environment variable controls the debug level for this backend.
Higher debug levels increase the verbosity of the output. The debug
level 7 is the author's prefered value to debug backend problems.

Example: 
export SANE_DEBUG_AVISION=7

.SH "SEE ALSO"
sane(7), sane\-scsi(5)
.br
http://drocklinux.dyndns.org/rene/avision/index.html

.SH AUTHOR
René Rebe and Meino Christian Cramer
