.TH sane-sm3600 5 "10.02.2002"
.IX sane-sm3600
.SH NAME
sane-sm3600 - SANE backend for Microtek scanners with M011 USB chip
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sane-sm3600
library implements a SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy) backend that
provides access to some Microtek scanners with the Toshiba M011 custom
USB chip.  This backend should be considered alpha.
.PP 
There exist a backends for Microtek scanners with SCSI command set.
Refer to sane-microtek(5) and sane-microtek2(5) for details.
.PP
At present, the following
scanners are known positively to work with this backend:
.PP
.RS
Vendor     Product id:     Remark:
.br
--------   --------------  -----------
.br
Microtek   ScanMaker 3600  all modes ok
.br
Microtek   ScanMaker 3700  reported to work
.br
Microtek   ScanMaker 3750  reported to work
.RE
.PP
If you own a Microtek scanner with the M011 chip other than the ones
listed above, it may or may not work with SANE!

.SH "FRONTEND OPTIONS"
This backend dynamically enables the options for the frontend,
that are supported by the scanner in dependence of the scanning-mode
and other options. Not supported options are disabled.
.PP
The following options are supported by the Microtek2-driver:
.PP
Color, grayscale, halftone and lineart scans.
.PP
contrast, brightness, control, gamma correction.

.SH "DEVICE NAMES"
This backend does not support device names in a standardized form.

.SH CONFIGURATION
This backend does not support a configuration file right now.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-sm3600.a
The static library implementing this backend.
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-sm3600.so
The shared library implementing this backend (present on systems that
support dynamic loading).

.SH PERMISSIONS AND INTERFACES

The backend uses \fBlibusb\fR and it's pseudo files in
\fI/proc/bus/usb/*\fR. Since \fBlibusb\fR versions 0.1.3b and 0.1.4 have
incompatible binary data structures, You must be shure not to have obsolete
header files. When You mix wrong versions, the scanner detection code will
raise a "segment violation".

These files are normally owned by \fBroot\fR and You are responsible
to get access to these files, for example \fBchown\fR-ing them to
Yourself. If You have no right permissions, the backend will find the
device, but You'll get an I/O error.

The better way is to use automatical \fBhotplugging\fR. See
\fIhttp://sm3600.sf.net/hotplug.html\fR for instructions and useful
links.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SANE_DEBUG_SM3600
If the library was compiled with debug support enabled, this
environment variable controls the debug level for this backend.  E.g.,
a value of 128 requests all debug output to be printed.  Smaller
levels reduce verbosity. To see error messages on stderr set
SANE_DEBUG_SM3600 to 1.

.br
E.g. just say:
.br
export SANE_DEBUG_SM3600=5

.SH "SEE ALSO"
sane-microtek2(5), http://sm3600.sourceforge.net

.SH AUTHOR
.br
Marian Eichholz (eichholz@computer.org)
.br
Glenn Ramsey (glenn@componic.com)
.br

