.TH sane-u12 5 "06 Jan 2004" "@PACKAGEVERSION@" "SANE Scanner Access Now Easy"
.IX sane-u12
.SH NAME
sane-u12 \- SANE backend for Plustek USB flatbed scanners,
based on older parport designs
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sane-u12
library implements a SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy) backend that
provides access to USB flatbed scanners based on ...

.SH "SUPPORTED DEVICES"
The backend is able to support USB scanner based on...

If your Plustek scanner has another Product ID, then the device is
.B NOT
supported by this backend.
.br

Vendor Plustek - ID: 0x07B3
.br
----------------------------------------------------------
.br
USB Model:         Properties:              Prod-ID
.br
----------------------------------------------------------
.br
OpticPro U12       600x1200dpi 42bit 512Kb  0x0001
.br
OpticPro U1212     600x1200dpi 42bit 512Kb  0x0001
.br
OpticPro UT12      600x1200dpi 42bit 512Kb  0x0001
.PP

Vendor KYE/Genius - ID: 0x0458 (Vivid III = 0x07B3)
.br
------------------------------------------------------------
.br
USB Model:                  Properties:              Prod-ID
.br
------------------------------------------------------------
.br
ColorPage Vivid III USB     600x1200dpi 42bit 512Kb  0x0001
.br
ColorPage HR6 V1            600x1200dpi 42bit 512Kb  0x2004
.PP

.SH "CONFIGURATION"
To use your scanner with this backend, you need at least two
entries in the configuration file
.br
.I @CONFIGDIR@/u12.conf
.TP
.I [usb] vendor-id product-id
.TP
.I device /dev/usbscanner
.PP
.I [usb]
tells the backend, that the following devicename (here
.I /dev/usbscanner
) has to be interpreted as USB scanner device. If vendor- and
product-id has not been specified, the backend tries to
detect this by its own. If device ist set to
.I auto
 then the next matching device is used.
.PP
.B
The Options:
.PP
option warmup t
.RS
.I t
specifies the warmup period in seconds
.RE
.PP
option lampOff t
.RS
.I t
is the time in seconds for switching off the lamps in
standby mode
.RE
.PP
option lOffonEnd b
.RS
.I b
specifies the behaviour when closing the backend, 1 --> switch
lamps off, 0 --> do not change lamp status
.RE

.PP
See the u12.conf file for examples.
.PP
.B Note:
.br
You have to make sure, that the USB subsystem is loaded
correctly and you have access to the device-node. For
more details see
.B sane-usb (5)
manpage. You might use
.B sane-find-scanner
to check that you have access to your device.
.PP
.B Note:
.br
If there's no configuration file, the backend defaults to
.B device auto

.SH FILES
.TP
.I @CONFIGDIR@/u12.conf
The backend configuration file
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-u12.a
The static library implementing this backend.
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-u12.so
The shared library implementing this backend (present on systems that
support dynamic loading).

.SH "CONTACT AND BUG-REPORTS"
Please send any information and bug-reports to:
.br
.B SANE Mailing List
.PP
Additional info and hints can be obtained from our
.br
Mailing-List archive at:
.br
.B http://www.sane-project.org/mailing-lists.html
.PP
or directly from the projects' homepage at:
.br
.B http://www.gjaeger.de/scanner/u12.html
.PP
To obtain debug messages from the backend, please set the
environment-variable
.I SANE_DEBUG_U12
before calling your favorite scan-frontend (i.e. xscanimage).
.br
.B i.e.: export SANE_DEBUG_U12=20 ; xscanimage
.PP
The value controls the verbosity of the backend.

.SH "KNOWN BUGS & RESTRICTIONS"
* The driver is in alpha state, so please don't expect too much!!!
