.TH sane-sceptre 5 "13-Feb-2002"
.IX sane-sceptre
.SH NAME
sane-sceptre - SANE backend for SCEPTRE scanners
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sane-sceptre
library implements a SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy) backend that
provides access to Sceptre flatbed scanners. This backend should be
considered
.B beta-quality
software! Please report any strange behavior to the maintainer of the
backend or to the SANE mailing list.
.PP
At present, only one scanner is known to work with this backend:
.PP
.RS
Model:                       Connection Type
.br
---------------------------  -------------------
.br
Sceptre VividScan 1200       SCSI
.RE

The make of this scanner is KINPO, so other scanner from that manufacturer may also work.
.SH OPTIONS
The options the backend supports can either be selected through command line
options to programs like scanimage or through GUI elements in xscanimage or xsane.

Valid command line options and their syntax can be listed by using 
.RS
scanimage --help -d sceptre
.RE
.TP
.I Scan Mode
The 
.I --mode 
switch selects the basic mode of operation of the scanner valid choices are 
.I Lineart, Halftone, Gray and Color. 
The Lineart and Haltone mode are black and white only (1 bit). Gray will produce 256 levels of gray (8 bits). Color will produce a 24 bits color image. The scanner suports 30 bits internally but it only exports 24.

The
.I --halftone-pattern
switch selects the pattern mode that is used in Halftone mode. Valid options are 1, 2, 3 and 4.

The 
.I --gamma-correction
switch controls the scanne internal gamma correction. Valid options are "Default", "User
defined", "High density printing" "Low density printing" and "High contrast printing".

The 
.I --resolution
switch selects the resolution for a scan. The scanner can do several resolutions between 50 and 1200.

The 
.I --custom-gamma
parameter allows the user to specify a gamma table (see the next 3 parameters).

The 
.I --red-gamma-table 
parameter can be used to download a user defined gamma table for the red channel. The table must be 256 bytes long.

The 
.I --green-gamma-table 
parameter can be used to download a user defined gamma table for the green channel. The table must be 256 bytes long.

The 
.I --blue-gamma-table 
parameter can be used to download a user defined gamma table for the blue channel. The table must be 256 bytes long.

The
.I --threshold
sets the threshold for black and white pixels in lineart mode. Possible values are from 0 (darker) to 255 (lighter).

The 
.I --preview
option requests a preview scan. The resolution used for that scan is 50 dpi. The default is "no".

The geometry options
.I -l -t -x -y 
control the scan area: -l sets the top left x coordinate, -t the top
left y coordinate, -x selects the width and -y the height of the scan
aea. All parameters are specified in milimeters.


.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
The configuration file @CONFIGDIR@/sceptre.conf supports only one information: the device name to use (eg /dev/scanner).


.SH FILES
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-sceptre.a
The static library implementing this backend.
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-sceptre.so
The shared library implementing this backend (present on systems that
support dynamic loading).


.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SANE_DEBUG_SCEPTRE
If the library was compiled with debug support enabled, this
environment variable controls the debug level for this backend. E.g.,
a value of 128 requests all debug output to be printed. Smaller
levels reduce verbosity.

.SH "SEE ALSO"

sane\-scsi(5), scanimage(1), xscanimage(1), xsane(1), sane(7)


.SH BUGS

None known.


.SH AUTHOR

The package is actively maintained by Frank Zago.

