.TH "sane\-genesys" "5" "6 Oct 2009" "@PACKAGEVERSION@" "SANE Scanner Access Now Easy"
.IX sane\-genesys
.SH "NAME"
sane\-genesys \- SANE backend for GL646 and GL841 based USB flatbed scanners
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The
.B sane\-genesys
library implements a SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy) backend that provides
access to USB flatbed scanners based on the Genesys GL646 and GL841 chips.
At present, the following scanners are known to work with this backend:
.PP 
.RS
Medion MD5345/MD6228/MD6274
.br 
Visioneer OneTouch 7100
.br
Hewlett-Packard HP2300C
.br 
Visioneer Strobe XP100 (rev3)/XP200/XP300/Roadwarrior
.br
Canon LiDE 35/40/50/60
.br
Pentax DSmobile 600
.br
Syscan/Ambir DocketPORT 485/487/665/685
.br
Xerox Travel Scanner 100
.RE

.PP 
This is stable software for supported models. But if you test new or untested scanners, keep
your hand at the scanner's plug and unplug it, if the head bumps at the end of
the scan area.
.PP 
If you own a scanner other than the ones listed above that works with this
backend, please let me know this by sending the scanner's exact model name and
the USB vendor and device ids (e.g. from
.IR /proc/bus/usb/devices ,
.I sane\-find\-scanner
or syslog) to the sane\-devel mailing list. Even if the scanner's name is only
slightly different from the models mentioned above, please let me know.
.PP 
If you own a scanner that isn't detected by the genesys backend but has a GL646
or GL841 chipset, you can try to add it to the backend. 
.PP 
.SH "CALIBRATION"
To give correct image quality, sheet fed scanners need to be calibrated using the
calibration sheet sold with the scanner. To do calibration, you must insert this target
in the feeder then start calibration either by passing the --calibrate option to scanimage
or by clicking on the available 'calibrate' button in the 'advanced options' in a graphical
frontend. The result of the calibration is stored in a file in the home directory of the user doing it.
If you plug the scanner in another machine or use it with another account, calibration
will have to be redone.

.SH EXTRAS SCAN OPTIONS

.B \-\-lamp\-off\-time number
        The lamp will be turned off after the given time (in minutes). A value of 0 means that the lamp won't be turned off.

.B \-\-threshold  percent
	0..100% (in steps of 1). Select minimum brightness to get a white point. Pixels
whith brightness below that value will be scanned as black.

.B \-\-disable-interpolation yes|no
        When using high resolutions where the horizontal resolution is smaller than vertical resolution,
data is expanded by software to preserve picture geometry. This can be disbled by this option to get
real scanned data.

.B \-\-color-filter None|Red|Green|Blue
        When using gray or lineart this option selects the used color. Using a color filter
will give a monochrome scan. CIS based scanners can to true gray when no filter (None value) is
selected.

.PP
.SH "SYSTEM ISSUES"
This backend needs libusb-0.1.6 or later installed, and hasn't tested in other
configuration than a linux kernel 2.6.9 or higher. However, it should work any
system with libusb where the SANE package can be compiled. For
setting permissions and general USB information look at
.BR sane\-usb (5).


.SH "CONFIGURATION"
The contents of the
.I genesys.conf
file is a list of usb lines containing vendor and product ids that correspond
to USB scanners. The file can also contain option lines.  Empty lines and
lines starting with a hash mark (#) are ignored.  The scanners are
autodetected by
.B usb vendor_id product_id
statements which are already included into
.IR genesys.conf .
"vendor_id" and "product_id" are hexadecimal numbers that identify the
scanner. 
.PP 

.SH "FILES"
.TP 
.I @CONFIGDIR@/genesys.conf
The backend configuration file (see also description of
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
below).
.TP 
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane\-genesys.a
The static library implementing this backend.
.TP 
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane\-genesys.so
The shared library implementing this backend (present on systems that
support dynamic loading).
.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.TP 
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
This environment variable specifies the list of directories that may
contain the configuration file.  Under UNIX, the directories are
separated by a colon (`:'), under OS/2, they are separated by a
semi-colon (`;').  If this variable is not set, the configuration file
is searched in two default directories: first, the current working
directory (".") and then in @CONFIGDIR@.  If the value of the
environment variable ends with the directory separator character, then
the default directories are searched after the explicitly specified
directories.  For example, setting
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
to "/tmp/config:" would result in directories "tmp/config", ".", and
"@CONFIGDIR@" being searched (in this order).
.TP 
.B SANE_DEBUG_GENESYS
If the library was compiled with debug support enabled, this environment
variable controls the debug level for this backend.  Higher debug levels
increase the verbosity of the output. If the debug level is set to 1 or higher,
some debug options become available that are normally hidden. Handle them with
care. This will print messages related to core genesys functions.
.TP 
.B SANE_DEBUG_GENESYS_GL646
This environment variable controls the debug level for the specific GL646 code
part.
.TP 
.B SANE_DEBUG_GENESYS_GL841
This environment variable controls the debug level for the specific GL841 code
part.


Example (full and highly verbose output for gl646): 
.br
export SANE_DEBUG_GENESYS=255
.br
export SANE_DEBUG_GENESYS_GL646=255

.SH CREDITS
  
Jack McGill for donating several sheetfed scanners, which made possible to add support
for them in the genesys backend.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR sane (7),
.BR sane\-usb (5)
.br 


.SH "AUTHOR"
Oliver Rauch
.br 
Henning Meier-Geinitz <henning@meier\-geinitz.de>
.br 
Gerhard Jaeger <gerhard@gjaeger.de>
.br 
St\['e]phane Voltz <stef.dev@free.fr>
.br 
Philipp Schmid <philipp8288@web.de>
.br 
Pierre Willenbrock <pierre@pirsoft.dnsalias.org>
.br

.SH "LIMITATIONS"

Powersaving isn't implemented for gl646 based scanner.
.br

.SH "BUGS"
Currently no known bug.
.PP 

