.TH sane-lexmark 5 "02 September 2005" "@PACKAGEVERSION@" "SANE Scanner Access Now Easy"
.IX sane-lexmark
.SH NAME
sane-lexmark \- SANE backend for Lexmark X1100 Series scanners
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sane-lexmark
library implements a SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy) backend that
provides access to the scanner part of Lexmark X1100 AIOs. This backend
should be considered
.B beta-quality
software! 
.PP
The scanners that should work with this backend are:
.PP
.RS
.ft CR
.nf
   Vendor Model           status
----------------------  -----------
  Lexmark X1110           untested
  Lexmark X1140           untested
  Lexmark X1150           untested
  Lexmark X1170           untested
  Lexmark X1180           basic
  Lexmark X1185           basic
.fi
.ft R
.RE

The options the backend supports can either be selected through
command line options to programs like scanimage or through GUI
elements in xscanimage or xsane.

.br
If you have any strange behavior, please report to the backend
maintainer or to the SANE mailing list.

Valid command line options and their syntax can be listed by using 
.RS
scanimage --help -d lexmark:usb:<usb port>
.RE

.TP
.B Scan Mode

.TP
.B --mode
selects the basic mode of operation of the scanner valid choices are 
.I Lineart
,
.I Gray
and
.I Color
The Lineart mode is black and white only (1 bit). Grayscale
will produce 256 levels of gray (8 bits). Color will produce a 24 bit
color image.

.TP
.B --resolution
selects the horizontal resolution for a scan.

.TP
.B --y-resolution
selects the vertical resolution for a scan. 

The scanner is capable of the following resolutions:
.PP
.RS
.ft CR
.nf
  Horizontal Resolution   Vertical Resolution 
  ----------------------  --------------------
  75dpi                   75dpi
  150dpi                  150dpi 
  300dpi                  300dpi 
  600dpi                  600dpi 
  600dpi                  1200dpi 
.fi
.ft R
.RE

.TP 
.B --preview
requests a preview scan. The resolution used for that scan is 75 dpi
and the scan area is the default or user selected as is the scan mode. The default is "no".

.TP
.B paper-size
 Selects the size of the area to be scanned. Valid sizes are
.I Wallet
,
.I 3x5
,
.I 4x6
,
.I 5x7
,
.I 8x10
,
.I Letter
, the default size is 3x5.
        

.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
The configuration file @CONFIGDIR@/lexmark.conf contains only the usb device id (eg usb 0x043d 0x007c).


.SH FILES
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-lexmark.a
The static library implementing this backend.
.TP
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-lexmark.so
The shared library implementing this backend (present on systems that
support dynamic loading).


.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SANE_DEBUG_LEXMARK
If the library was compiled with debug support enabled, this
environment variable controls the debug level for this backend. E.g.,
a value of 128 requests all debug output to be printed. Smaller levels
reduce verbosity.


.SH LIMITATIONS
The windows TWAIN driver has many more options than this SANE
backend. However they are only software adjustments. This backend only
implements what the scanner can support.


.SH BUGS

Byte ordering for color scans.
Jerky movement on 600dpi gray 8x10 scan.
Lineart not working.
Color calibration not implemented.
Dark compensation not implemented.



.SH "SEE ALSO"

sane\-scsi(5), scanimage(1), xscanimage(1), xsane(1), sane(7)


.SH AUTHOR

.TP
The package is actively maintained by Fred Odendaal.
.I http://ca.geocities.com/freshshelf@rogers.com/
