.TH sane-umax1220u 5 "6 Jan 2002" "@PACKAGEVERSION@" "SANE Scanner Access Now Easy"
.IX sane-umax
.SH NAME
sane-umax1220u \- SANE backend for the UMAX Astra 1220U scanner

.SH DESCRIPTION

The
.B sane-umax1220
library implements a SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy) backend for the
the UMAX Astra 1220U scanner.

For the latest information on this backend, please visit
.IR http://umax1220u-sane.sourceforge.net/ .

.SH UMAX ASTRA 2000U EXPERIMENTAL SUPPORT

This backend may also be able to drive the UMAX Astra 2000U.
Some people are successful with it, others report that the
colors come out terrible. Your milage may vary.

From Stephane (the author of sane-umax_pp), I learned that there
are differences in the way the color calibration is performed on
the 1220U and the 2000U and it may account for the problem.
Stephane's backend support the 2000P, the parallel port sibling
to the 2000U. It may be possible to use ideas and code from 
Stephane's backend to add complete support for the 2000U to
this backend. Since I do not have access to an Astra 2000U, I
do not plan to work on this \- any volunteers?

.SH CONFIGURATION

The configuration file for this backend resides in
.IR @CONFIGDIR@/umax1220u.conf .

Its contents is a list of device names that correspond to UMAX Astra 1220U scanners.
Empty lines and lines starting with a hash mark (#) are ignored. A sample
configuration file is shown below: 

.nf
 #usb vendor product
 usb 0x1606 0x0010
 # Device list for non-linux systems
 /dev/scanner 
 /dev/usb/scanner0
.fi

When driving a Astra 2000U, use the product number 0x0030. See sane-usb(5) for
information on how to set the access permissions on the usb device files.

.SH FILES

.TP
The backend configuration file:
.I @CONFIGDIR@/umax1220u.conf
.TP
The static library implementing this backend:
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-umax1220u.a
.TP
The shared library implementing this backend:
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane-umax1220u.so
(present on systems that support dynamic loading)

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
.B SANE_DEBUG_UMAX1220U
If the library was compiled with debug support enabled, this environment
variable controls the debug level for this backend. E.g., a value of 128
requests all debug output to be printed. Smaller levels reduce verbosity:

SANE_DEBUG_UMAX1220U values

.ft CR
.nf
Number  Remark
\ 
 1       print failures
 2       print information
 3       print high-level function calls
 4       print high-level function checkpoints
 9       print mid-level function calls
 10      print mid-level function checkpoints
 80      print protocol-level function entry
 90      print protocol-level function exit
.fi
.ft R

.TP
Example:
export SANE_DEBUG_UMAX1220U=10

.SH KNOWN BUGS

600 dpi scanning may fail for large image sizes.

If you keep getting I/O errors, try cycling the power on your scanner to reset it.

There is no way to cancel a scan, since the driver ignores sane_cancel().

If you try scanning an image which is too small, you will get I/O errors. Be
sure to adjust the scan area before doing a scan, since by default, the scan
area is zero.

.SH SEE ALSO
sane(7), sane\-usb(5)

.TP
For latest bug fixes and information see
.I http://umax1220u-sane.sourceforge.net/

.SH AUTHOR

Marcio Luis Teixeira <marciot@users.sourceforge.net>

.SH EMAIL-CONTACT
umax1220u-sane-devel@lists.sourceforge.net

.SH REPORTING BUGS

When reporting bugs, please run the backend with SANE_DEBUG_UMAX1220U
set to 10 and attach a copy of the log messages.
