.TH sane-coolscan 5 "4 July 2000"
.IX sane-coolscan

.SH NAME
sane-coolscan - SANE backend for Nikon film-scanners

.SH ABOUT THIS FILE

This file is a short descripton of the coolscan-backend for sane! 

.SH DESCRIPTION

The
.B sane-coolscan
library implements a SANE backend that provides the interface to the following Nikon Coolscan Film scanners: Nikon LS20, LS30, LS1000, LS2000.

.B Even though the backend has worked for a number of people, there are still some problems, especially in combination with some SCSI card/drivers (AHA-1505/aha152x.o) and the autofocus command. You should consider this backend 'alpha' and be carefull when using it the first time.

.SH CONFIGURATION

The configuration file for this backend resides in 
@CONFIGDIR@/coolscan.conf. 

Its contents is a list of device names that correspond to Nikon Coolscan scanners. Empty lines
and lines starting with a hash mark (#) are ignored. A sample configuration file is
shown below: 

 #scsi Vendor Model Type 
 scsi Nikon * Scanner 
 /dev/scanner 

The special device name must be a generic SCSI device or a symlink to such a device.
To find out to which device your scanner is assigned and how you have to set the
permissions of that device, have a look at sane-scsi. 

.SH SCSI ADAPTER TIPS

Some SCSI-adapters and low-level SCSI drivers do not work correctly with this backend and the
Coolscan scanners. These systems hang when the autofocus command is send to the Scanner.
To see a list of which card/driver combinations work or dont work have a look at:
http://andreas.rick.free.fr/sane/autofocus.html.



.SH FILES

The backend configuration file:
 @CONFIGDIR@/coolscan.conf. 

The static library implementing this backend:
 @LIBDIR@/sane/libsane-coolscan.a

The shared library implementing this backend:
 @LIBDIR@/sane/libsane-coolscan.so
 (present on systems that support dynamic loading)

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.B SANE_DEBUG_COOLSCAN
 If the library was compiled with debug support enabled, this environment
variable controls the debug level for this backend. E.g., a value of 128
requests all debug output to be printed. Smaller levels reduce verbosity:
SANE_DEBUG_COOLSCAN values

Examples:
 on bash:
 export SANE_DEBUG_COOLSCAN=8
 on csh
 setenv SANE_DEBUG_COOLSCAN 8

.SH BUGS

 The autofocus command does not work with some SCSI card/driver combinations
 The gamma table is not implemented for the LS1000 yet.
 The dust-removal is not working yet

.SH SEE ALSO

 http://andreas.rick.free.fr/sane/ The homepage of this backend
 http://www.sema.be/coolscan/  The original version of the coolscan backend by Didier
 sane(7), sane\-scsi(5)

.SH THANKS TO

 Didier Carlier - For writing the original Coolscan backend (without it I would not have started this) 
 Oliver.Rauch - For adapting xsane so quickly to the infrared stuff.
 All the other people working on SANE.

.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Rick

.SH EMAIL-CONTACT
andreas.rick@free.fr
