.\" .IX sane-umax_pp
.TH "sane-umax_pp" "5" "16 September 2003" "@PACKAGEVERSION@" "SANE Scanner Access Now Easy"
.SH "NAME"
sane\-umax_pp \- SANE backend for Umax Astra parallel port flatbed scanners
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The
.B sane\-umax_pp
library implements a SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy) backend that
provides access to Umax parallel port flatbed scanners.  The
following scanners work with this backend:
.PP 
.RS
Model:                
.br 
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\- 
.br 
Astra 610P         
.br 
Astra 1220P         
.br 
HP3200C            
.br 
Astra 1600P       
.br 
Astra 2000P      
.br 
.RE
.PP 
This backend handles 75x75, 150x150, 300x300, 600x600 and 600x1200 for 1220P/1600P/2000P
dpi scan reslutions,and 75x75, 150x150, 300x300 and 300x600 for 610P. In color and gray 
levels, there is a software lineart mode.
.PP 
The new generation models share a newer version of the 610P ASIC embedded in an EPAT chip. 
Only parts such as CCD and ADC change from
one to another. They even all reports being UMAX Astra 1220P via IEEE1284.
There isn't software way to recognize them properly. Under windows, model is
set by the driver installed, regardless of the hardware. 
.PP 
.TP 
.B EPP/ECP MODES ONLY
The current version of the backend uses only EPP or ECP mode to communicate 
with the scanner. PS/2 mode isn't implemented. The 610P only use SPP. It is 
recommended that you set your parallel port to EPP in BIOS with the current 
version of this 
backend. You can leave it to ECP or ECP+EPP, but in this case you may not use
ppdev but only direct hardware access if you have to use ECP.  ECPEPP will only
 work if you use a 2.4 or 2.6 kernel with ppdev character device support.
.PP 
This backend does support parport sharing only 
.I 
if you have a kernel with ppdev support.
.I 
.PP 
Note that if you don't use the ppdev character device, the backend 
needs to run as root. To allow user access to the scanner
run the backend through the network interface (See saned(8) and sane\-net(5)).
A more relaxed solution (security wise) is to add suid bit to the frontend
(See chmod(1)).
The backend drop root priviledges as soon as it can, right after gaining direct
access to IO ports, which lessen risks when being root.

.SH "DEVICE NAMES"
This backend expects device names of the form:
.PP 
.RS
.I port value
.RE
.PP 
Where
\fBvalue\fR is : 

.RS
value         description.br 
.br 
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\- \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br 
auto          autodetect all parallel ports and probe
.br 
              them for scanner
.br 
safe\-auto     autodetect all parallel ports and probe
.br 
              them for scanner, but does not try direct
.br 
              hardware access
.br 
/dev/ppi0     uses *BSD ppi device, depending on the
.br 
              number of available parallel port, you
.br 
              have to use /dev/ppi1, /dev/ppi2, ...
.br 
/dev/parport0 uses linux ppdev device, depending on the
.br 
              number of available parallel port, you
.br 
              have to use /dev/parport1, /dev/parport2, ...
.br 
0x378         does direct hardware access on the given
.br 
              address. Usual values are 0x378, 0x278, 0x3BC
.br 
              In this case, you have to run the scanner as 
.br 
              root (*BSD and linux), or with 'IOPL=yes' on
.br 
              OS/2
.br 
.PP 
.RE
\fBNOTE:\fR in all cases, you must have sufficient priviledges
.br 
to get access to the chosen device or address. Depending on the
.br 
security settings, devices may not be available for all users.
.br  
You have to change permissions on the dev/ppi* or /dev/parport* devices. 
.br 
.PP 
.RE
You can rename any device using the
.PP 
.RS
.I name devname
.br 
.I model model
.br 
.I vendor vendor
.RE
.PP 
options. These options apply to the last port option. 

.SH "CONFIGURATION"
Please make sure to edit umax_pp.conf
.B before
you use the backend.
.PP 
The contents of the
.B umax_pp.conf
file is a list of options and device names that correspond to Umax
scanners.  Empty lines and lines starting with a hash mark (#) are
ignored.
.PP 
The height options supported are
.BR red\-brightness ,
.BR green\-brightness ,
.BR blue\-brightness ,
.BR red\-contrast ,
.BR green\-contrast ,
.BR blue\-contrast ,
.BR astra ,
and
.BR buffer .

Options
.B red\-brightness
,
.B green\-brightness
and
.B blue\-brightness
allow you to adjust the sensitivy of your scanner for the given color. Values
range from 0 (lowest brightness) to 15 (highest). If the advanced option "Brightness" isn't
checked in the frontend, the backend does automatic brightness calibration, and do not use
user provided values.

.PP 

Options
.B red\-contrast
,
.B green\-contrast
and
.B blue\-contrast
allow you to adjust the contrast of your scanner for the given color. Values
range from 0 (lowest contrast) to 15 (highest). 
.PP 

Option
.B astra
allows you to change the model of your scanner. Current auto detection is based
on side effects on scanning when using 1220P command set on other models, so
it may fail on unkown hardware combination. Valid values are 610, 1220, 1600 
and 2000. It is usefull only when autodetection fails to detect properly
your scanner model. If your scanner work properly but is reported wrongly, 
let it be that way. 
The only valid case to change the model is when your scanner produces 'black' or 
'inverted' scans. In this case you can put the model. Be aware that it will 
prevent scanner model autodetection.
.PP 

Option
.B buffer
allows you to change the size of the scan buffer. The size must be specified in
bytes. The default value is 2 megabytes. Decreasing this value will improve the
smoothness of progress bar in the frontend, but will stall the
scan more often.

.PP 



.SH "FILES"
.TP 
.I @CONFIGDIR@/umax_pp.conf
The backend configuration file (see also description of
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
below).
.TP 
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane\-umax_pp.a
The static library implementing this backend.
.TP 
.I @LIBDIR@/libsane\-umax_pp.so
The shared library implementing this backend (present on systems that
support dynamic loading).

.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.TP 
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
This environment variable specifies the list of directories that may
contain the configuration file.  Under UNIX, the directories are
separated by a colon (`:'), under OS/2, they are separated by a
semi\-colon (`;').  If this variable is not set, the configuration file
is searched in two default directories: first, the current working
directory (".") and then in @CONFIGDIR@.  If the value of the
environment variable ends with the directory separator character, then
the default directories are searched after the explicitly specified
directories.  For example, setting
.B SANE_CONFIG_DIR
to "/tmp/config:" would result in directories "tmp/config", ".", and
"@CONFIGDIR@" being searched (in this order).
.TP 
.B SANE_DEBUG_UMAX_PP
If the library was compiled with debug support enabled, this
environment variable controls the debug level for this backend.  E.g.,
a value of 128 requests all debug output to be printed.  Smaller
levels reduce verbosity.

.PP 
.RS
level   debug output
.br 
\-\-\-\-\-\-\- \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br 
 0       nothing
.br 
 1       errors
.br 
 2       warnings & minor errors
.br 
 3       additional information
.br 
 4       debug information
.br 
 5       code flow (not supported yet)
.br 
 6       special debug information
.RE
.PP 
.TP 
.B SANE_DEBUG_UMAX_PP_LOW
This variable sets the debug level for the SANE interface for the Umax
ASIC. Note that enabling this will spam your terminal with some
million lines of debug output.

.PP 
.RS
level   debug output
.br 
\-\-\-\-\-\-\- \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br 
 0       nothing
.br 
 1       errors
.br 
 8       command blocks
.br 
 16      detailed code flow
.br 
 32      dump datafiles      
.br 
 255     everything
.RE
.PP 
 
.PP 
.SH "SEE ALSO"
sane(7), sane\-net(5), saned(8)

.TP 
For latest bug fixes and information see
.I http://umax1220p.sourceforge.net/

.SH "AUTHOR"
Stéphane VOLTZ <svoltz@wanadoo.fr>

.SH "CREDITS"
Support for the 610P has been made possible thank to an hardware donation
by William Stuart.

.SH "BUG REPORTS"
If something doesn't work, please contact me. But I need some information about
your scanner to be able to help you...

.TP 
.I SANE version
run "scanimage \-V" to determine this
.TP 
.I the backend version and your scanner hardware
run "SANE_DEBUG_UMAX_PP=255 scanimage \-L 2>log" as root. If you don't get any output
from the umax_pp backend, make sure a line "umax_pp" is included into
your @CONFIGDIR@/dll.conf.
If your scanner isn't detected, make sure you've defined the right port address, or the
correct device 
in your umax_pp.conf.
.TP 
.I the name of your scanner/vendor
also a worthy information. Please also include the optical resolution and lamp type of your scanner, both can be found in the manual of your scanner.
.TP 
.I any further comments
if you have comments about the documentation (what could be done better), or you
think I should know something, please include it.
